Hello, My name is Audra Kocher.
I'm an interventional cardiologist at the
Brigham and Women's Hospital and we're at
the privilege of serving as the program
director for the Interventional
Cardiology Fellowship.
And in this role,
I became very interested in how to
optimize well-being and minimize
potential injuries for our trainees,
which has led me to help lead A-Team here
at the Brigham to conduct a prospective
study called Ergo Cath,
which we feel very passionately about
sharing with everyone today.
So the title of my talk today is what the
data tell us,
ergonomic and orthopedic risks in the
Cath lab.
These are my disclosures,
the most pertinent of which is in order
to fund the Ergo Cath study,
we did apply and obtain a research grant
from our colleagues at Rampart Inc.
So let's set the stage with a background.
I'm personally an interventional
cardiologist and,
and and thus have to give a lot of credit
to my colleagues at Sky who advocate for
our community and in their advocacy have
done now serial surveys about every
decade or so,
The most recent of which was conducted in
2023, published last year,
really looking at the occupational
hazards of being an interventional
cardiologist.
And the most recent survey really
highlights some very important findings.
The first of which is that 60%,
let me repeat that number again.
60% of respondents had at least one
orthopedic injury with a third of
respondents stating that they had
experienced lumbar spinal injuries.
20% of respondents were forced to limit
their time in the Cath lab with the
obvious downstream economic ramifications
to to those local Cath lab environments
and obviously the negative impact on
patients who required care and would to
be able to get it from those
interventional cardiologists.
Moreover,
there was a threefold higher risk of
radiation related pathology to
interventional cardiologists as compared
with the general population,
including factors such as malignancies
and cataracts.
And so based on these rather sobering
data,
our team at the Brigham became really
interested in the question,
which was sort of what are the underlying
mechanisms that drive such a high risk of
orthopedic injury in particular and and
what research has been done.
And when we delved into the literature,
we realized that there really were a
dearth of studies that were examining the
underlying mechanisms that were driving
this very high rate of injury.
Importantly,
these injuries were occurring despite,
despite the fact that many interventional
cardiologists were engaging in
preventative efforts.
In fact,
over 80% of respondents were engaged in
some kind of preventative efforts,
whether that was strength training,
stretching or yoga and other exercises
such as aerobic activities and Pilates
and, and,
and this sort of background really sort
of drove us to design the Ergo Cath study.
Ergo Cath was a single center prospective
study with the primary goal of
quantifying the ergonomic strain on Cath
lab operators.
And specifically we wanted to condition
this on two key situations.
The first was sort of standard
traditional Cath lab practice wearing
lead shielding usually at our lab will
wear a vest and a skirt.
But then the second condition was to
assess these ergonomic strain patterns in
a lead free environment using the novel
Rampart device,
which allowed us to literally shed our
lead and to proceed from there.
So for this study,
we recruited 20 Cath lab operators.
This included attending cardiologists,
fellows,
both general fellows and interventional
fellows.
And then we had a cadre of wonderful
physician assistants who work with us as
well.
Additionally, as a pre specified analysis,
we had a cohort of both nurses and
technicians whom we studied at our lab.
Even if the Rampart device is being
employed,
the nurses and techs both will still wear
lead and so we only studied them in that
sort of traditional lead condition.
So how did we measure the ergonomic
strain?
Well,
we used multiple different measurement
modalities to understand different
dimensions of ergonomic strain and
potential risk to orthopedic injury.
First,
we employed inertial monitoring units or
I am use.
These allow us to capture live kinematic
data and to quantify the amount,
amount of time that a particular joint is
in a high risk position.
And so let me focus your eyes right here.
This is an IMU center at this sort of
C7C8 level and it will allow us to
quantify the percent of time that this
operator is in a high risk flex or
extended position as opposed to in a
neutral position.
Next, we use surface EM GS,
which you see right here.
So the surface EM GS allow us to quantify
muscle activation,
peak muscle activation levels and then
some sort of mean muscle activation
levels as well to get a sense of concepts
of muscle fatigue and and we know that
muscle fatigue can then be associated
with soft tissue injury and downstream
orthopedic injury.
We used a validated musculoskeletal
injury survey to try to quantify the
amount of discomfort that operators were
were facing with these cases.
And then we used a real time radiation
dose monitoring system to understand the
amount of radiation that operators were
being exposed to in the two conditions.
Again,
this sort of traditional LED vest and
skirt versus using the more novel Rampart
system.
The primary endpoint for this analysis
was a percent of time that was in a high
risk position and I've alluded to sort of
some of the pre specified endpoints that
we have alluded to.
This is a graphical depiction of the data
that we were seeing.
You can see here is one of our fellows
leaning over as we're removing an
impellus peel away sheath.
And you can see in a pictorial
representation of his spine in in what
extreme angles he's had to contort his
spine in order to do a relatively routine
task.
And you can imagine then how high the
strains are,
especially cumulatively if we're exposing
ourselves to these high strains day after
day.
For anyone who is not familiar with the
Rampart system,
it's a interlocking business,
acrylic motorized panels that essentially
allows physicians to and technicians
potentially to get out of lead.
It slides over the patient.
And we can talk more about this later,
but I really would love to delve into the
data.
So these are the primary findings of the
Ergo Cath study.
Just to provide a little bit of context,
the mean age is around 4140% of
participants were female.
There was good distribution between
attendings and interventional fellows.
In particular,
the highest percent of cases were
diagnostic coronary cases.
There's a fair amount of PCI that were
captured in ergo Cath as well as some
structural and other cases such as
pericardial synthesis and radar caths.
This is the most important slide of this
talk.
So if you haven't been paying attention
till now, I'd sort of focus on this one,
which demonstrated for the primary
endpoint that at the cervical joint in
the axial rotation dimension,
it was in a high risk position for 34% of
case duration.
That is a soberingly high number for us
to be putting our C spine in such a high
risk position for so long.
Case to case, perhaps not unsurprisingly,
as the picture that I showed before
really revealed,
is that fellows or P As were placed in a
higher risk position more frequently than
attendings,
most prominently again in the cervical
spine in that axial rotation dimension.
Moreover,
our nurses and techs were in high risk
positions even more than we as operators
were,
particularly in the torso pelvic
dimension.
So pretty similar in the cervical,
axial and cervical flexion dimensions.
But if,
if I focus your eyes to the torso pelvic
flexion area,
our nurses and techs were in
significantly higher frequency of being
in a high risk position there,
which I think is based on the different
tasks that they're doing,
sort of bending down to, to,
to pick a stent or leading up to,
to grab certain equipment and so forth.
Now, why do we care about it,
especially at the cervical C spine level?
Well,
we know extrapolating from prior
ergonomic and orthopedic data that even
very modest deviations from neutral
position can result in drastically higher
spinal loads.
So if I focus your eyes here to sort of a
neutral position,
just set sort of standing neutrally,
the force to the C spine is about 5
kilograms.
Even only a modest deviation, about 30%,
will increase the force to C spine to 18
kilograms to more than three fold higher.
And so again,
the concern is not just the individual
case,
but the cumulative impact of day after
day, month after month, year after year,
that turns into decade after decade.
What about the surface EMG data?
Well,
this showed some pretty interesting data.
Let me first provide a little bit of
context.
The surface EMG data is calculated as a
percentage of an NVC or maximal voluntary
contraction.
So that is done before we have even
started to measure any data.
You, you,
you calculate an MVC and then all these
values that you have here are a percent
of that.
We know from prior literature that a
surface EMG values of 15 certainly 20%
correlate with a higher risk for muscle
fatigue and micro trauma.
And so if we look in the lead leaded
condition at the mean cervical EMG value
is 21 percent and the peak was over 250.
And if we look in the in the comparator
group in the rampart arm that we can see
that there is a considerable reduction in
both the mean and the peak value.
And similarly if we look at the lumbar
power spinal muscles that the mean value
there is 18, so above that 15% threshold.
And again if we look at the intervention
arm that there is a reduction in
basically all the surface EMG parameters
in the mean value,
peak and variability values,
suggesting that using a sort of novel
leadless system may help reduce muscle
activation,
muscle fatigue and potentially then micro
drama.
Looking at the data from our real time
radiation monitoring,
we see that there was a fivefold
reduction in radiation exposure to
operators using the Rampart system as
compared with a traditional lead
protection.
So what can we do about this?
Well,
there is a trial that was published out
of the Mayo Clinic called the STRETCH
trial that included a a relatively simple
intervention.
It was a 15 minute daily stretching
program that was designed in
collaboration with a physical therapist
and focused on a number of different
aspects, the neck, upper extremities,
lower back and lower extremities.
And even this was done over a year.
The average amount of time that people
actually engaged in this was only 120
days.
But even with a relatively low engagement
rate,
there was a statistically significant
reduction in both neck and arm related
pain,
suggesting that this is an important part
of what we should be incorporating in our
daily practices.
Furthermore,
and this is a image of what the different
exercises were over that 15 minute.
Furthermore,
looking at the surgical literature,
there is a fair amount of data that
suggests that using micro breaks,
especially during long cases,
may be very advantageous.
So even one to two-minute deliberate
interventions every 40 or so minutes
involving rotational movements and
activation of different muscle groups did
not increase case duration,
but did result in improved mental focus
and also considerably higher association
with improvement in physical performance
as well.
I think we are in a very exciting time in
interventional cardiology and this should
extend to other areas of medicine such as
interventional radiology,
GI vascular surgery in which there
finally are multiple different potential
solutions to the joint issues of
radiation related injury and orthopedic
related harm that is magnified as a
result of wearing sort of have you LED in
that sky survey that I alluded to earlier,
the primary barrier to adoption and novel
strategies was cost and administrative
hurdle.
And I would say that as a clinical
community,
it is essential that we advocate for this,
not just for ourself,
but if for no other reason than just
economics, right?
Reducing the amount of time that
individuals are out of the Cath lab are
allowing for greater efficiency and less
discomfort and allowing for, for,
for better and I think higher quality
care.
So lots of different potential solutions.
And I think it's important that we start
adopting these in a thoughtful but very
deliberate manner.
All right,
Final take home points is that 60% of
interventional cardiologists suffer from
some orthopedic injury with a third of of
those suffering lumbar spinal injuries.
And this leads to considerable downstream
economic issues,
challenges with recruitment to our field
and and certainly most importantly,
potential patient care ramifications.
We designed the Ergocath study that
showed that amongst Cath lab operators,
the cervical joint was in a high risk
position for 34% of case duration.
There are several solutions included
including rather dedicated daily
stretching program and one to two-minute
micro break interventions that markedly
reduce self reported discomfort and novel
leadless or or minimal lead solutions
coupled with these tailored exercise
regimens may finally allow us to start
bending the endemic or pandemic of
orthopedic and radiation related injuries
down.
With that,
I will say thank you so much for your
time.
Happy to take any questions on Twitter
and by e-mail as well.
Thank you so much.
Bye.
Exercise to reduce and prevent injury and
fatigue and interventional radiology,
the whys and the house.
So these are my disclosures.
So why should we as interventional
radiologists exercise?
So this is what we know from the
literature.
There is a connection between physical
fatigue and mental performance,
indicating that physical exhaustion can
impair cognitive functions such as
executive functions,
auditory and visional attention,
and decision making.
Mental fatigue can lead to
musculoskeletal discomfort and decreased
performance,
and there is also scientific evidence
supporting that physical training for
chronic pain and reduction.
Furthermore,
posture can influence musculoskeletal
health and mental performance.
As interventional radiologists very often
exposed to long procedures with static
positions.
We also wear radiation protective
clothing, sometimes heavy and warm.
These things combined act as a stressor
on the body,
which can induce both mental and physical
fatigue.
We know that prolonged physical stress
can lead to muscular fatigue and
discomfort,
which in turn activates the stress
response system,
leading to elevated cortisol levels and
neurotransmitter imbalances.
This can appear cognitive functions and
cause mental fatigue which in turn can
cause mental muscle fatigue and pain.
This leads to a vicious circle of
physical and mental discomfort.
Physical exercise can promote the
expression of brain derived neurotropic
factor that supports neural health and
plasticity and can also lead to an
increase in the release of dopamine and
serotonin which in turn enhance mood and
mental stamina.
There is convincing scientific evidence
that physical training in the form of
resistance training and or endurance
training can reduce and prevent chronic
pain and this did a study from last year
on surgeons but even mentioned
interventional radiologists concluded
that work induced musculoskeletal pain
has a negative effect on both work
capacity and also increases the risk of
burnout.
Participants performed resistance
training twice a week with improved neck
and back pain.
The study also mentioned that resistance
training improves bone density and
reduces all 'cause mortality.
So what about posture?
Well,
we know that there is a relationship
between a slouching posture and the risk
of musculoskeletal pain.
Anterior pelvic tilt can be associated
with back pain,
and postural training can reduce
musculoskeletal pain.
Furthermore,
studies show that a bad posture can
affect cognitive performance as well as
increased stress.
So how do we best prevent and mitigate
musculoskeletal pain?
As interventional radiologists,
I have chosen to focus on three main
areas, namely resistance training,
aerobic training and postural training.
When it comes to resistance training,
2 to 3 workouts a week up to one hour in
duration should be sufficient with a
focus on back, hips, core and shoulders.
Compound movements are preferred with
free weights as they are more time
efficient and also best activate the
trunk stabilizers which are crucial for
enduring long procedures.
We also know that resistance training can
improve tendon strength and stiffness and
also keep our joints healthy.
So for the back and hips I would choose a
squat variation either with a barbell or
dumbbells.
The squat can be done as a regular back
squat or a single leg squat.
The single leg squat puts more emphasis
on the trunk stabilisers and balance,
but less stress on the lower.
Back.
Squats should be combined with a hip
hinge movement,
preferably some kind of deadlift,
which also can be performed with a
barbell or dumbbells.
The hinge put more emphasis on the
posterior chain musculature that,
combined with the trunk stabilisers,
play an important role for our posture.
To further train the core muscles,
I recommend different static hold planks
variations.
When it comes to the upper body and
shoulders,
choose a push and a pull variation using
dumbbells or a barbell.
Strength training machines can also be
used since the upper body movements are
not as depending on dependent on core
stability as the lower body movements are.
For example bench press or dumbbell press
combined with a barbell or dumble row or
a pull down machine.
As for aerobic exercise,
you can choose more or less anything you
like as long as it's conducted with a
continuous pace or as interval training
or every.
If you do a lot of resistance training,
especially for the legs,
I would recommend moderate intensity in
order to provide for optimal recovery.
So postural training has gained interest,
increasing interest within the physical
therapy and fitness communities in recent
years.
To start with postural training,
there is a lot of resources online.
These exercises can be performed either
following a manual or under the
supervision of a coach.
The exercises are normally prescribed as
a menu depending on your individual
individual postural dysfunctions and some
general considerations for physical
training.
First and foremost,
and especially when it comes to
resistance training with three weights,
learn and focus on proper technique.
This is key for preventing injury and
improper movement patterns.
And be consistent.
Consistency leads to adaptation of time.
Use progressive overload overload,
gradually increase the resistance
intensity and training time,
and remember that you can't achieve good
training results without proper nutrition
and recovery.
If possible,
take micro pulses between interventions.
This can be very effective a way to
decompress both your body and your mind.
So in summary,
regular physical training is beneficial
for interventional radiologists.
Resistance training using compound
movements targeting back, hips,
core and shoulders is effective.
Aerobic exercise and aniform is
recommended.
2:00 to 3:00 work UPS per week up to
about an hour is sufficient and postural
training can be of value.
Thank you very much.
Thanks for having me everyone.
My name is Andrea Tagari.
I'm an interventional cardiologist
practicing in Toronto, Canada.
So I'm going to keep this practical and
discuss how we protect both from
radiation and from orthopaedic strain.
And I'll show you how we what we use in
our lab and why.
The goal is to pick one change that you
can start as soon as possible.
Scattered to the head and neck is a
career long exposure and the weight of
lead plus reach and rotation,
specifically with increasing radial
approach and left radial drives real
musculoskeletal issues.
If we only solve for dose or only for
posture, we miss the point.
We need both.
You'll see two baselines,
absolute and absolute reductions and
unshielded and incremental reductions on
top of standard setup,
which usually consists of an apron,
ceiling screen and table skirts.
Angles, energy,
distance and placement matter.
So treat the folded numbers as ballpark
and pay attention to the evidence type to
understand whether it's derived from
phantom or bench,
real world observational or RCT studies.
Aprons and collars are the foundation as
they provide excellent torso attenuation,
but they don't protect the head and eyes
by themselves and the weight adds up over
a career.
That's why we layer upstream protections.
Most operators and even nurses wear lead
glasses as well these days.
Ceiling suspended and table skirts were
the next barriers adopted and became the
standard of care.
When the ceiling shield is close and
stable,
head and chest dose can drop dramatically.
Table skirts protect the legs and pelvis.
The key is consistency.
Drift and steep angles can erase the
benefits or proper repositioning
continuously is critical.
Patient side drapes are adjuncts near the
source to fill gaps when the ceiling
screen isn't enough.
Typical additional reduction over
standard shielding.
Shielding is about 20 to 60%,
but results are placement dependent.
The drapes can sometimes obstruct access
and are disposable after only one use of.
This limits their general practicality.
Suspended systems are one of the first
new innovations beyond standard Shields
and offload the apron weight and provide
strong protection for the wearer.
They're great for backs and necks,
but you still need room shielding to
protect the rest of the team.
Mobility and use in different sides of
the table can also make it less versatile.
So this has limited the adoption of the
suspended protection.
More lately a comprehensive barriers have
come into the market and they provide
much more protection of our bodies to the
room or the the imager.
So coverage becomes reliable and team
wide.
So examples include Rampart, Portego,
egg nest and the CR mounted options like
Radioaction.
Across the category,
reductions versus standard care or
protection are typically very,
very high in the order of 90 to 98 or 99%
when compared to the standard shielding.
This has been quite an advancement
compared to what we've seen in the past.
It's important to consider the residuals.
Programs often see about 1 to 2 MIC
receivers per case at the operator or
assistant shoulder and it's not uncommon
to see 0 dose cases where physics and
policy supported.
The apron optional pathway is something
to consider.
It's also helpful to think about
protection for assistance and
echocardiographers and anaesthesiologist,
not just the primary operators,
as they will be positioned at other
points of the table for different
procedures.
It's also important to think about how
and where the decimeters were used to
measure the reported doses.
So for ergonomic supports,
this is the other half of the the
equation.
There are a few options available.
Some of them provide the extra added
benefit of radiation reduction as well.
As an example,
the Armory system supports both right and
left radial and in an RCT demonstrated an
additional 60% operator dose reduction
beyond standard shielding.
Others have phantom only data and
sometimes if a board is actually in the
radiation beam,
it may block where the shield needs to
sit and it can actually cause radiation
scatter to actually go up in some cases.
So proper integration with a good board
is important.
So a word about apron optional status.
Apron optional status is a policy
decision, not a product label.
Programs that adopt it typically present
physics evidence of very low residual
staff dose,
confirm with the monitored pilot using
extra head and collar to symmetry,
and maintain governance with periodic
audits.
In the US,
approvals are handled by the institution
level and usually require state approval
as well.
In Canada, where I practice,
there's currently no provision to accept
an apron optional status and sites simply
follow the safety code guidance under the
RSO and Medical Physics review.
But we are currently working to actually
make advancements in this area.
So I'll just kind of briefly go through
what we currently use in our lab.
We have a Rampart Defender,
the floor based shielding model and it's
paired with their table mounted shielding
for full team coverage on that side of
the table,
which is how our current workflow is.
And we also use the Armory radial boards
for added ergonomics.
We are a 95% radial site,
so we definitely appreciate the the added
benefit there.
We chose this combination because of its
clinical evidence and in the US the apron
optional experience aligns with the apron
optional pathway that we're actively
pursuing at our site.
So this will involve some Health Canada
supported approval with our RSO and
medical team while we work,
while we allow the workflow to remain
smooth.
So in the images on the right hand side,
you can actually see the way that access
can be maintained quite comfortably with
the patient's arm fully abducted.
Following this,
the device actually can fold up to
support the patient's left humerus,
really locking the elbow into place,
which both keeps the patient quite
comfortable and does not allow the arm to
move.
And the lower left hand side,
you can see that the left radial is
actually quite accessible,
probably about the midline between the
two femoral axis sites.
So quite comfortable.
You can see how you're able to actually
stand with a fairly straight spine
without having to reach across,
which can be a real pain.
I used to hate left radio because of the
support issues,
but since using proper support it makes
it much much less cumbersome.
So when you pull it, put it all together,
you need to set up the room so that
scatter paths are enclosed,
drapes are actually put on and and do not
move and you do a quick shield gap huddle
before the first case of the day.
You can keep a simply simple monthly
dashboard and track dose by a role of the
personnel keep monitoring the shield.
Use a real time monitoring is actually an
excellent adjunct as well and following
apron hours for the staff and then doing
a 90 day examination to see where you're
at in terms of progress is excellent as
well to kind of really show the benefits.
So my advice is to pick one barrier
change,
one ergonomic habit and some support for
that as well.
And one metric.
This is not something that needs to wait.
In fact,
I would urge you all to try and champion
this in my sight.
It took someone like myself to basically
make this an urgent need.
And with with the support from colleagues,
this is something that everybody can make
happen at their own center.
So I urge you actually to start the
conversations and see what works for your
lab in terms of your workflow and try to
make the changes as soon as possible
because it this is a lasting change
that's going to benefit you for the rest
of the years.
So I'll have happy to answer any
questions in the panel discussion.
Thank you so much for your time.
Thank you and welcome back to the
question answer part of Session 3,
which were some great talks,
protecting your body and preventing
injury and fatigue,
which we all seem to have in this
profession.
We have a great,
great group of panelists here that's
going to weigh into it.
They can answer your questions.
Again,
just send us your questions and we'll try
to answer it.
While we have these experts here,
we have doctor Audra Kocher should be
joining us any any minute.
He's from Brigham Women's and really a
specialist and, and,
and doing a lot of research on the
ergonomic strain that we're all feeling.
Doctor Erickson from Sweden,
he's an interventional radiologist and I
wish we all looked like him physically
from the pictures.
Oh, thank you.
Great.
And then we have Doctor Yadagari from the
interventional cardiologist in
Scarborough, ON Canada.
So have some, have a great panel here.
And again,
hopefully you'll you'll send in send in
some of your questions.
I want to start off and then we have
doctor Bella Hausen, who is a Co director.
She's going to kind of also help with
some questions and love the panel to
weigh in as well,
because this ought to be a very, you know,
a really good dynamic discussion.
Have a little bit more time on this one
than we have had on some of the other
discussions.
So hopefully we can dive deep,
really dive deep into this.
First thing I want to ask you,
Doctor Erickson is, well,
first tell you a story that that I was
last week,
he got walking in my neighborhood and I
saw one of my previous partners in
interventional cardiology and he was
walking down the road with a ruck.
And I guess that's the new thing now,
those ruck exercises.
So he had a weighted vest and and that
seems to be the thing to do here now is
wearing those weighted vests when you
exercise.
You think that's a good thing or a bad
thing?
I don't know, actually, I mean it.
I think,
I think that the reason why people are
doing this is that, you know, you,
you increase the,
the load and the energy expenditure,
you know, per step,
but it also makes your joints, you know,
work harder.
It's extra actual loading on on the body.
So I don't know actually if there's any,
any scientific evidence for if it's
better than not wearing a vest.
I mean, I don't personally do it.
I, I, I, I just, you know,
I do my runs and and now perhaps for
walking, it's less stressful.
So perhaps there you have you.
You can use it while walking,
but I don't actually believe wearing it
while running because each running step
you take a man it, it's, it's,
it's about you increase the load on your
knee and, and,
and hip joint by like 3 times your body
weight or even more if you run really,
really fast.
You know, as the,
as the elite guys or and women do that.
I mean, they,
they really expose their joints to heavy
loading and just increasing that is
something I don't actually believe in,
but that's my personal thoughts.
Yeah, yeah.
And we do some of these exercises.
I guess the question is, is it,
is it better to do it simply daily or pre
procedural, post procedural,
what's is there?
Is there a timing that actually helps
that's kind of optimal for us?
Or is it just the fact that that you do
these exercise routine,
they will build up the,
the core and the muscles?
Yeah, I think, I think when,
when it comes to the strength training
and the, and the, the endurance training,
I mean, as I mentioned in my, in my speak,
that consistency is key.
You know, you have to be consistent and,
and,
and work with progressive overload over
time when it comes.
I personally do, when I'm,
I'm very much into postural training
because that is something that really had
made my body and how I feel and I have
moved much better.
And I know also a few of my colleagues do
it, you know, they, they, we do like,
depending on how you're,
if you have dysfunctions in your,
in your posture, if,
if you're like leaning on one side or
you're standing more on one foot than the
other, you can do an assessment.
And then you get prescribed like a,
like a menu of, of,
of postural corrective exercises.
And I spend like 20 minutes each morning,
you know, after breakfast,
I do these menus and it feels like I get
more, you know, my, my,
my body becomes more stacked like this,
you know, it, it feels more relaxed.
My, my shoulders come back,
my hips feel more loose.
I feel like I'm standing up more straight.
And that carries over to when I'm in the,
when I'm in the, in the cat lab.
And I, I,
because I think about how I'm standing my,
my,
my weight is more evenly distributed over
my both feet and so on.
You know, so I think these things,
I think it's very beneficial to do on a
daily basis when it comes to training,
resistance training and endurance
training.
That's a more sensitive matter because it
depends on how much you can take.
The more you train,
the more you can train,
you know that that that's how it is.
So you you can't bite off more than you
can chew.
So I think you have to be, if you,
if you're, if you're new to training,
just start gradually and increase over
time and don't, don't get carried away.
But when it comes to postural training,
I think,
I think even even between sessions,
I do small corrected exercises, you know,
depending on where I feel in something in
the shoulder and the neck,
I do specific exercises for that,
you know, and if I feel my, my,
my lower back,
I can decompress for a few minutes,
you know, So that is something I, I,
I actually recommend that's,
that's fantastic.
Before I get to Doctor Kocher,
I wanted to ask Doctor Yargari about,
I think that we are obviously in the US
adopting more of a radial,
radial approach,
but certainly haven't gotten to the level
that you have in Canada and doing right
radial and left radial.
And,
and I guess what ergonomic positions that
put you put you in?
And should we adopt that more,
if for no other reason just because it it
puts us in a in a better position?
Yeah, in, in Canada,
I know that radial access has actually
been adopted quite early actually.
You know, Victoria,
the group out there was one of the
earliest ones in the early 2000s to
really push the radial approach.
And most centers in Canada are about 95%,
I would say primarily radial.
I think it's there's a lot of benefits to
not just a patient in terms of vascular
access complications,
but even to operators.
It's the easiest access I would say or
easiest, I guess access.
Once you have your catheter in position,
it's just right in front of you.
There's no reaching across femorals,
which makes it quite favorable,
provided you have the, I guess,
experience,
you know how to position catheters and
all that.
The one area that becomes I think even
through my training of what 12 years ago
or so was the left radial that shows just
kind of increase over time as well.
So particularly patients with either poor
right radial access or who have a Lima
post cabbage,
we just tend to go left radial and it
gives us access to the Lima pretty easily
actually.
And then easier than going femoral quad
usually.
And then you can get pretty much all your,
your pictures and we do the PCI from that
route as well.
The issue is without proper support,
the left reel can be a real pain in the
back if you're not.
And we started out with, you know,
just kind of clipping the patient's arm
to the drapes.
Of course,
the drapes are not being held by anything.
And by the time you're kind of doing your
PCI and pushing your guide to get better
support,
patient's arm ends up at their side.
Now you're reaching all the way across
the patient.
If it's a larger patient,
it's a real pain.
So that, that's kind of for me why the,
the support for left radial especially
makes a big difference.
And in our lab with the equipment that we
have, it's, it's like no,
no problem at all.
The way it works with the Armory just
kind of peeks out under,
I'd say right around kind of midline
between the females where the left radial
ends up.
So it's been a huge,
I'd say advancement since we started
doing that in Canada.
Great, fantastic.
Doctor Howson,
I'm sure you have some questions too.
Yeah, I mean,
Doctor Harrison kind of just touched upon
that because I was going to say in terms
of exercises for women in particular,
postural correction prior to anything is
crucial,
but you've already mentioned that.
Is there anything, I mean,
you've helped me personally over the
years,
but is there anything because I mean,
a lot of the departments,
this is not being sexist,
but just in general,
a lot of the radiographers are female in
in my trust and most of the trusts were
of.
So this is a huge population that is
obviously just naturally because of
hormones and pregnancy and change to the
anatomy that posture is heavily affected
and then hitting the hormones of
menopause and premenopause, it's affected.
Is there anything that you would
recommend for this group more than any of
the other groups?
Would you say that maybe just focus on
postural is enough or postural and
weights?
I know for me you've said the combination,
but I just wondered in general,
would that be the best advice for
everybody else?
I think when it comes to differences
between males and females,
I don't actually think that is what as
far as I know,
I've been studying the the this postural
training staying quite a lot and and as
far as I know,
they don't recommend any differences in
in approach.
It all comes down to to comes down to
what kind of compensations you you are
you are demonstrating in your posture.
For example,
if you have I think for for females,
perhaps they perhaps they can get the
more you know, it's,
it's it's more it's more common among
women to have an anterior pelvic tilt.
You know, the pelvis is is is pointed.
So you get a more,
a larger lumbar called curvature like
this.
It's more,
it's more common in women and that can
cause problems both downstream and
upstream when it comes to slouching
shoulders or, or knees that are, you know,
less internal rotation of the of the
femur can leads to knee problems.
Women also have a,
a greater Q angle in their,
in their knees, you know,
so all these things combined can lead to
a series of all the compensatory problems.
But I think what it all boils down to
addressing the 'cause you know, and, and,
and taking appropriate measures to,
to fight these compensations, you know,
so, so I don't think there is actually,
men can also demonstrate this kind of, of,
of, of, of postural imbalances.
So I don't think there is actually a
difference between women and men in that
in that regard.
Thank you.
I know that when I'm in the lab,
it seems like just as day goes on,
I just kind of start bending over.
My posture gets worse, worse and worse.
And I think, you know,
it's some of the pictures that Doctor
Kocher showed.
We're putting ourselves in some terrible,
you know, ergonomic,
ergonomic positions with that, you know,
reaching and twisting and,
and turning and flexing.
And,
and so I do think that that's something
that that we have to, you know,
we certainly have to address fairly
quickly because unfortunately we are
seeing few juniors presenting with disc
prolapses.
Now whilst there's a variety of why it
may happen,
the fact that they happen to be wearing
lead is something that is of great
concern.
So anything that can help,
whether it's exercises, strengthening,
posture correction or just being with
minimal lead, the better.
But I think it's it's it's really
important.
And the more data that we have,
the better.
I just bring it up.
Yeah, sorry.
So I was going to bring up one very small,
but I think important point that I've
noticed myself using the foot pedals for
those of us who actually step on the
floor ourselves,
you tend to end up with a favorite foot
and I think you end up leaning one way
quite heavily throughout all day.
And so I try to just alternate the foot
that I use small point that I think kind
of helps to balance the tilt and the
pelvis you might end up with.
That's a very good suggestion.
I do actually exactly the same.
You know,
you alter from left to right all the time.
And I think it,
you have to be aware of your, how you,
how you move.
You know, you have to be aware on your,
where you have your, your weight.
Now my weight is on the left.
Now my weight is on the right now my neck
is forward.
Now my, you know,
it's small things that you can actually
be aware of during your procedure.
And after a while it becomes second
nature If you just pay attention to it
and, and, and focus on that.
It's not so difficult actually to, to,
to just take a take a moment and how am I
actually standing right now?
How is, how is my posture right now?
I mean, I, you know, the, the, the,
the horror image that the,
that the doctor culture showed, You know,
when you're well twisted and of course
you don't need to be a, a doctor to,
or a physical therapist to realize that
that is not healthy.
You know, it's, it's, it's like,
it's crazy to be mindful.
I think of your of your, how you're,
how you,
how you move and how you're standing.
Very good.
Doctor Kocher, you're on.
Did you have a question?
Your hand was up.
Can you hear me?
I don't know if he can hear me or not.
Yeah.
Can I?
Yeah.
Sorry.
Yeah.
I just wanted to build.
Yeah.
I think he's having some Internet.
Internet issues,
one of the things that had kind of come
up in some of the other sessions is
reporting,
reporting injuries and and if we have
these kind of injuries,
is there is there really a way to to
report these to get it,
to get a good idea?
Are they really,
we have surveys and obviously the surveys
have been based on a lot of surveys have
been done, but, but you know,
do we really have a way of knowing what
is the true injury rate,
both with from or cataracts and,
and musculoskeletal to really get a good
grasp of are we under reporting or, or,
you know,
are we reporting it just based on,
on pain and fatigue, which obviously is,
is a,
is a signal that maybe something's going
on as well.
While,
while I have an access here to chat with
you guys,
it sounds like the MGB Internet is,
is failing me here.
But really quickly,
can I just say a couple,
a couple quick points.
If,
if people didn't get anything else from
ergo Cath,
sort of the key message was that 34% of
total case duration was spent in a high
risk cervical position.
But specifically that was in the axial
rotation plane.
And so I've been thinking a lot about
that.
For those of us who work in the Cath lab,
you'll know,
and I'm sure this is a similar in IR and
other suites, we generate a ton of waste,
right?
Every balloon that you get,
you've got a stilette,
you've got a compliance chart,
and then you've got the hoop.
And at least what I've been doing was
turning around to throw it away.
And so one of the opportunities I think
we have is to redesign Cath labs.
So for example,
I'm putting the trash in front of me now
so that I'm throwing the trash out in
front as opposed to sort of turning
around every time I need to do that.
And then the second point to your comment
about measuring,
measuring the overall rate, look,
the institution's never going to love you
back.
And so I think at a societal level,
we're going to have to mandate actually
obtaining these data.
And that's the only way that we're going
to really get the the true rates.
Even the sky survey from 2023 was only an
8% response rate, so not very high there.
That's a good point.
There are some and,
and anybody can kind of weigh on weigh in
on this because I don't know the answer,
but some, some want to say, well,
you know, how are we ever,
when are we going to know that any of any
of these changes that,
that have improved the ergonomics that
we're actually improving the the risk and
actually lowering the,
the disease process and lowering your
risk for cancer because they're not being
reported very well.
So it's hard to know whether or not any
of these are really having much of an
impact.
And there's some, you know,
there's some people say,
I'm not going to adopt anything until I
have, you know,
10 year data to show that actually
reduces your, your risk.
And, and we don't have that data.
You know,
we know we have signs and and we know
that from some of the work that Doctor
Kocher has done that that we're putting
ourselves in these really high flexion
and high risk positions.
And so I think we just have to right now
do everything that we can to reduce it,
But it's not going to take the risk,
you know,
certainly not going to take the risk to 0,
but, but we've got to, you know,
we've got to, to me,
certainly from radiation standpoint,
take that down as low as what's
achievable with the technologies that you
have.
And,
and with these new systems and sea arms
and things like that,
that are really driving the amount of
radiation producing.
And, and you know, there's quite a few,
particularly EP that's getting to the
point that a lot of their procedures are
X-ray free.
So, so again,
I think all those technologies and
combined together,
I think we're going to get to a point
that they can really, you know,
put us in a lot safer place and hopefully
recruit more people in our field.
Because I don't know what it's like in
Canada and Sweden in the UK,
But but but here in the US,
there's a massive shortage of people
going into going into cardiology,
particularly women.
I think the biggest point is,
is to realize when you have a full day
shift and you've been in LED doing
various procedures,
I doubt many people leave at the end of
the day feeling great or amazing or Oh my
God, I feel my back is so great.
I think I can run a marathon.
The reality is by the time you finished
your day shift,
even if they were simple procedures and
nothing complicated going on,
I think the majority of us can put our
hands up and say we do not feel great.
Apart from Doctor Erickson,
we don't feel that great.
You know, there's something aching,
there's a twitch,
or you're always like the number of
people we have that we're doing this,
it's common.
So I think that alone,
forget the things we don't see or feel.
That definitely suggests we need to
change.
We need to do something.
I I would say two couple things.
You know this when we were looking to to
do ergo Cath,
we were looking to actually measure sleep
as well.
And I don't know if this has been
mentioned at all as as I've been coming
in and out,
but I think high quality sleep is a
really important part of recovery.
And and then borrowing concepts from
actually our * athletes,
which I think many of you all are in,
in your own sort of ways is thinking
about load management.
I think it's particularly tricky in the
US they in an environment where Medicare
reimbursement is dropping and so there's
a ton of pressure to do more cases more
efficiently.
But I think from a look of longevity,
you know, you're doing a,
a six hour CTO after you've been up doing
a,
a STEMI with shock probably results in a
lot of micro trauma that over the course
of a career really accumulates into to
major injuries that we've seen in many of
our colleagues.
And so I think 2 concepts being really
prioritizing high quality sleep.
And then second is sort of some thought
about load management on top of a forget
if I,
I don't know if I had lobbed off their
previously, but the,
the concept I was trying to allude to was
redesigning Cath labs to be specifically
oriented to being more beneficial towards
optimizing ergonomics for, for,
for Cath lab operators.
And,
and specifically what I was saying there
is that, for example,
very simple shift that we've made is
actually have the trash can in front of
us so that we're not rotating to throw,
throw things out behind us.
I'm so glad you mentioned sleep.
So we had before in the prior talks about
inflammation and impact of inflammation
on healing and damage.
Now sleep and cortisol are major things
and I think we downplay it and I'm glad
that things are changing because in my
training,
certainly you were almost high 5 for not
sleeping and doing 7 nights in a row.
Oh you're such a hero.
But actually that is not hero at all.
Whilst we all require different number of
hours of sleep, like I need 10,
most people probably need 8,
some lucky folks need 5.
But I think it's important to find your
hours of sleep,
correct your cortisol and let everything
heal, calm down and and proceed.
And it's down to us to make sure that our
future juniors understand that they're
not going to get golden points for being
up all night and then coming and working
in the lab with me.
You're not a hero and you're not going to
be working in the lab.
You're going to go home,
sleep and come back refreshed.
But it's down to us to change that
culture.
And it emphasized that being arrested,
good doctor is actually more beneficial
in the long run in a broken doctor
halfway through their career.
And that that's,
that's very interesting because when,
when you mention sleep, when you, if you,
if you look at running related injuries,
you know, they,
they talk people talk a lot about how I
have to buy new shoes with more
cushioning and I had need to change my
running stride, you know,
because I get chin splints and I get
Achilles tendonitis.
The most effective.
And this has been shown in studies that
the most effective way to prevent running
injuries is sleep.
Everything else is secondary.
If you sleep 8 hours,
you get less injured.
If you sleep five hours,
you get more injuries.
That, that, that that's how it works.
So sleep builds resilience, you know, to,
to, to a lot of things, you know, as, as,
as we if, if we,
if we like for long procedures, you know,
actual loading everything like that.
Not,
doesn't matter if it comes to training or
if it comes to,
to working or butts off in, in, in the,
in the, in the IR lab.
You know, it's,
it's sleep is is absolutely the most
powerful tool you know for,
for for recovery and injury prevention.
That's true.
Good.
You may know the answer to this somebody
on the panel.
If you wear some of these monitors where
it's one of the either ring or the whoop
or the watch or whatever.
What do you see?
Like at the end of a very long day and
you're you're severely fatigued.
Does anybody have an experience with what
parameter changes the most?
I know probably sleep and sleep wake
cycles or is it heart rate variability or,
or what, what becomes abnormal after a,
after a long day's work when you're
fatigued?
Anybody know the answer to that?
Yeah, I'll, I'll say I,
I used a whoop and I think, you know,
we were actually hoping to embed that in,
in ergo caffeine.
So I'd say it's an opportunity for us to
study this.
We, we,
we should look at this more seriously.
I,
I got the sense in my own anecdotal
experience,
that's probably heart rate variability
that sort of diminished a little bit.
It's certainly fragmentation and sleep is,
is an issue.
And the other comment that I just wanted
to make is that in ergo,
we did a sub study where we looked at
actually nurses and techs.
And so it's just not us as operators,
but the entire environment.
And in fact,
they had higher rates of being in an high
risk position at the lumbar position
because they're doing different things
than we are right there bending down to
grab equipment or looking up to do that.
And,
and just wanted to make a point that it's
critical for us as the physicians,
but also the entire team is affected by a
lot of these factors as well.
For me, it's the steps.
So when I'm in a long day in the lab,
I'm doing less steps because you're kind
of in a weird position for a long periods
of time.
And it's case after case after case.
So especially if you're waiting area and
you consent areas all close by,
then I would never reach my 10,000 steps.
So that's the first one.
And then that has a cascade effect.
So I'm moving less, I'm stretching less,
my cortisol's all over the place.
I'm certain of it because my cortisol is
related to how many Snicker bars I need.
So when I have that easy 5 bars,
no problem.
Versus if I was completely away from the
site and I'm sleeping properly,
I probably wouldn't even think about
Snickers.
So that's, I think for me as a person,
that's how I see it or how I monitor.
That's fantastic.
Well, we are a few minutes over.
Great to see everyone here.
Great expertise.
I, I learned a lot.
Join me now we're going to have a,
a non semi innovation theater.
It's entitled biological impact of
radiation at the cellular level and
implementing changes toward radiation
safety and interventional labs.
We'll join back for the general session
at 3:40 Eastern.
So see you in a little while.